Merge the "Simplifying NoSQL Database Integration with Jakarta NoSQL" blogpost into staging (#3751)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2024-05-06-jakarta-nosql-in-action-meet-jnopo-game.adoc

      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD: example
    ports:
      - 27017:27017

  mongo-express:
    image: mongo-express:1.0.0-alpha
    restart: always
    ports:
      - 8081:8081
    environment:
      ME_CONFIG_MONGODB_ADMINUSERNAME: root
      ME_CONFIG_MONGODB_ADMINPASSWORD: example
      ME_CONFIG_MONGODB_URL: mongodb://root:example@mongo:27017/
----

For convenience, the previous example added a `mongo-express` service that allows us to navigate and manage MongoDB data through a friendly web interface.

NOTE: Feel free to customize the declaration of the containers in the `docker-compose.yml` file. For example, the database data is saved inside the container image, which means that the data will be lost if the containers are deleted.

Now, to start up the databases we just need to run the following command:

[source, bash]
----
docker-compose up -d
----

You should now be able to access the mongo-express UI at http://localhost:8081/ :

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/mongo-express.png[Mongo Express, align="center" width=80%]

=== Defining database credentials

Now that we defined the MongoDB database instance, we can set up the Eclipse JNoSQL framework correctly.

> Eclipse JNoSQL uses link:https://microprofile.io/specifications/microprofile-config/[MicroProfile Config] to get the required configurations to establish the connection to the databases. We can define these properties in the `resources/META-INF/microprofile-config.properties` file by using environment variables. For more information about MicroProfile Config, take a look at its link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/external-configuration.html/[External configuration of microservices].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eclipse JNoSQL uses link:https://microprofile.io/specifications/microprofile-config/[MicroProfile Config] to get the required configurations to establish the connection to the databases. We can define these properties in the `resources/META-INF/microprofile-config.properties` file by using environment variables. For more information about MicroProfile Config, take a look at link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/external-configuration.html/[External configuration of microservices] in the Open Liberty docs.
```

JNopo game uses link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/cdi/4.0/jakarta-cdi-spec-4.0#events[CDI Events] to promote extension points, based on event publishing, to be used as needed. With that, we can implement an `@Observable` methods on any CDI bean to handle event objects.

See the following `GameState` interface. Objects that implement this interface will act as event objects:

[source, java]
----
package org.jakartaee.sample.game;

public sealed interface GameState permits
        WaitingPlayers,
        GameInvalid,
        GameAbandoned,
        GameReady,
        GameRunning,
        GameOver {
    String gameId();
}
----

The `GameState` interface is a sealed interface that defines all the supported game states. According to the sealed implementation, the event that we're interested is the `GameOver` state. Such class is a record class. But it's not just a simple record class that acts like a data transfer object (DTO), it has useful methods that return important info like:

* The game identification
* A tied attribute, to know whether the game ended as a tied
* Player A and its moves
* Player B and its moves

> * The winning player and its moves, if the game ended without a tied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The winning player and its moves, if the game ended without a tie
```

> * The losing player and its moves, if the game ended without a tied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The losing player and its moves, if the game ended without a tie
```

- https://github.com/jnosql/demos-se
- https://github.com/JNOSQL/demos-ee

To learn more about Eclipse JNoSQL, take a look at these official repositories:

- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql
- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-databases
- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-extensions

if you're an expert on some NoSQL database that Eclipse JNoSQL doesn't support, feel free to open an issue or a PR on these project repositories.

Except for the NoSQL solutions like MongoDB and Couchbase, all the technology used in this blog post is open-source, so, what do you think about contributing to these projects? If you don't know how to get started to contribute, take a look at this https://www.youtube.com/live/7qhHOOoZEBU?feature=share[Coffee.withJava("Contribute to JNoSQL") Youtube Series], or if you prefer, feel free to contact me. Contributing to these projects is not just code, you could help a lot by promoting and speaking about them wherever you go! Contributing to open-source is a great way to boost your career and improve your skills to become an effective developer and relevant in the market! Think about that!

> == Special Thanks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Special thanks
```

- Otavio Santana, you're not just a mentor but a guiding star in my open-source journey. Your mentorship have opened doors for me to become an active open-source contributor and a proud Eclipse Foundation committer. Thank you for being such a monumental part of my journey. Also, thanks for your insightful reviews of the codes featured in this blog post.

- Karina Varela, your keen eye for detail and your generosity in sharing your knowledge have enriched this content beyond measure. Your thoughtful reviews have made this content not just better, but truly curated and relevant. I'm so grateful for your contribution.

- Fabio Franco, you were the catalyst for this wonderful opportunity, connecting me with the fantastic OpenLiberty team and offering your support throughout the publishing process of this blog post. Your belief in me and your encouragement have been invaluable. Thank you for making this possible.

- And to the OpenLiberty team, thank you for opening your doors and allowing me the privilege to share and post this content that I've thoroughly enjoyed working on. Thanks for this opportunity.

To each of you, your support means a lot to me, and I'm deeply thankful.

> == References and Further Reading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== References and further reading
```

---
layout: post

> title: "Jakarta NoSQL in Action: JNopo Game"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Jakarta NoSQL in action: JNopo game"
```

# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/dearrudam
author_github: https://github.com/dearrudam

> seo-title: TITLE - OpenLiberty.io

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-title: Jakarta NoSQL in action- JNopo game - OpenLiberty.io
```

> seo-description: Meet the JNopo game and delve into how Jakarta NoSQL together with Jakarta Data can ease the development process for Java developers using NoSQL databases with Liberty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-description: Learn about the JNopo game and how Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data can simplify using NoSQL databases with Liberty.
```

> blog_description: "Meet the JNopo game and delve into how Jakarta NoSQL together with Jakarta Data can ease the development process for Java developers using NoSQL databases with Liberty."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blog_description: "Learn about the JNopo game and how Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data can simplify using NoSQL databases with Liberty."
```

> open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg

Reviewer: ```suggestion
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/blog/jnopo-architecture-without-persistence.png
```

> open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
open-graph-image-alt: JNopo architecture diagram
```

---

> = Jakarta NoSQL in Action: JNopo Game

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Jakarta NoSQL in action: JNopo game
```

Maximillian Arruda <https://github.com/dearrudam>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /

> In the data-driven age of AI and cloud computing, the choice of data storage—relational or NoSQL databases—crucially influences a solution's success. The Jakarta NoSQL specification addresses this gap by providing a standard-based, easy-to-learn framework that mirrors the familiar JPA, simplifying development across various NoSQL databases. Meet the JNopo game and delve into how Jakarta NoSQL together with Jakarta Data can ease the development process for Java developers using NoSQL databases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the data-driven age of AI and cloud computing, the choice between relational or NoSQL databases crucially influences a solution's success. The Jakarta NoSQL specification addresses this challenge by providing a standard-based, easy-to-learn framework that mirrors the familiar JPA and  simplifies development across various NoSQL databases. Learn about the JNopo game and delve into how Jakarta NoSQL, together with Jakarta Data, can simplify using NoSQL databases.
```

> == Jakarta NoSQL in Action: JNopo Game

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> After getting an overview about Jakarta NoSQL, Jakarta Data, and Eclipse JNoSQL in this link:../../../2024/05/03/simplifying-nosql-database-integration-with-jakarta-nosql.html[blog post], we're in a good shape to explore and understand what an actual application implementation with Jakarta NoSQL would look like, through a sample game application that relies on non-relational storage and data manipulation.

Reviewer: we'll need to update this and all links between posts once we finalize the publish dates and update the file names

> === Getting Started: Playing JNopo!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Getting started: playing JNopo!
```

*JNopo* is a Java version of the famous the _Rock, Paper, and Scissors_ game. This game consists of a battle of two players where each one chooses a move between rock, paper, or scissors. Hopefully you're already familiar with the rules of this game, but if you are not, we've included some example scenarios to illustrate the game logic below. Let's suppose that a _Player A_ will play with a _Player B_ and, in this case:

* If _Player A_ chooses _ROCK_ and _Player B_ chooses _SCISSORS_ then _Player A_ wins the game.
* If _Player A_ chooses _PAPER_ and _Player B_ chooses _ROCK_ then _Player A_ wins the game.
* If _Player A_ chooses _SCISSORS_ and _Player B_ chooses _PAPER_ then _Player A_ wins the game.

> * If _Player A_ and _Player B_ choose the same movement then no one wins, and a tied game happens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If _Player A_ and _Player B_ choose the same move, then the game is a tie and neither player wins.
```

> In the sequence diagram below we can illustrate the default behavior of the JNopo game:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following sequence diagram, we can illustrate the default behavior of the JNopo game:
```

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/jnopo-sequence-diagram-without-persistence.gif[JNopo Sequence Diagram, align="center" width=60%]

> *JNopo* is a game implemented using Jakarta EE Specifications, which means, it's compatible with Jakarta EE and MicroProfile runtimes, and in our case we're using https://openliberty.io/[Open Liberty] 23.0.0.10.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JNopo is implemented using Jakarta EE Specifications so it's compatible with Jakarta EE and MicroProfile runtimes. In our case, we're using link:https://openliberty.io/[Open Liberty] 23.0.0.10.
```

> The architecture for this application is composed by two components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The architecture for this application is comprises two components:
```

> * The web page where the players interact to the game;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The web page where the players interact with the game
```

> * The back-end where the game matches are managed;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The back-end where the game matches are managed
```

> In the image below we can see the system design of the JNopo game:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following image, we can see the system design of the JNopo game:
```

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/jnopo-architecture-without-persistence.png[JNopo Architecture Diagram, align="center" width=60%]

=== It's fun time: Let's play JNopo!

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Before you start, this game uses the Maven Wrapper plugin, which means, you just need to have the *JDK 21* or later installed in your machine to build and run the application.
```

> Yeah! It's time have fun playing *JNopo*!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yeah! It's time have fun playing JNopo!
```

Clone the https://github.com/OpenLiberty/sample-jakartaNoSQL-game[Git repository]:

[source, bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/OpenLiberty/sample-jakartaNoSQL-game.git

cd sample-jakartaNoSQL-game
----

> Navigate to the `start` directory. This directory contains the starting project that we'll work through this blogpost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate to the `start` directory. This directory contains the starting project that we'll work through in this post.
```

[source, bash]
----
cd start
----

> It's a Maven project using Maven Wrapper plugin, which means, you just need to have the *JDK 21* or later installed in your machine to build and/or run the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> This project is ready to run with the https://openliberty.io/[Open Liberty] then you just need to perform the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This project is ready to run on Open Liberty. You just need to run the following Maven Wrapper command:
```

* For Mac or Linux:

+
[source, bash]
----
./mvnw liberty:dev
----

* For Windows:

+
[source, powershell]
----
mvnw.cmd liberty:dev
----

This will install all required dependencies and start the default server.

Now, if everything works, you can play the game by accessing the following URL address:

[source, curl]
----
http://localhost:9080/jakarta-nosql-game/
----

To play the game locally you just need to open two browsers tabs/windows pointing to the same URL address.

> === The Winner Ranking Challenge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== The winner ranking challenge
```

> This blog post will become more interesting: why not to challenge us to learn, create and improve our knowledge and practical software development skills, don't you? That's we're going to do: let's make JNopo provides a winner ranking!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where things get interesting: why not to challenge us to learn, create, and improve our knowledge and practical software development skills? That's we're going to do: let's make JNopo provide a winner ranking!
```

This challenge is an amazing opportunity to learn and explore how to use Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data to simplify NoSQL integration with Java applications.

> To get a winner ranking, JNopo needs to persist the game matches results and then summarize the results composing the ranking. To expose this ranking, it's expected that the application provides a REST API like below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get a winner ranking, JNopo needs to persist the game matches results and then summarize the results composing the ranking. To expose this ranking, the application must provide a REST API like the following example:
```

[source, bash]
----
curl -X GET \
  -H 'Accept: application/json' \
  http://localhost:9080/jakarta-nosql-game/api/playoffs/ranking
----

> The expected winner ranking structure should follow the JSON below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The winner ranking response is similar to the following JSON output:
```

[source, json]
----
{
  "data" : {
    "Max": 2,
    "Fabio": 1
  }
}
----

> I said, it'll be interesting!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As I said, it'll be interesting!
```

> === Implementing the Winner Ranking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Implementing the winner ranking
```

> The winner ranking requires a set of game matches results for its creation. To get that, we need to add to JNopo a persistence layer in order to capture and store the game match results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The winner ranking requires a set of game matches results. To get that, we need to add a persistence layer to JNopo that captures and stores the game match results.
```

> ==== Setting Up the Persistence Layer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Setting up the persistence layer
```

> Let's add the required dependencies to the project in order to be able to create the persistence layer. Our persistence layer will be implemented using Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data specification. Both are Jakarta EE specifications, and they require an implementation at least to work. Eclipse JNoSQL is the implementation that we'll going to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's add the dependencies to create the persistence layer. Our persistence layer will be implemented using Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data. To implement these Jakarta EE specifications, we'll use link:https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/technology.jnosql[Eclipse JNoSQL].
```

> Eclipse JNoSQL offers a Database API collection which covers these NoSQL flavours: Document, Key-value, Column and Graph databases. For now, Eclipse JNoSQL supports about https://www.jnosql.org/docs/supported_dbs.html[30 NoSQL databases].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eclipse JNoSQL offers a database API collection that covers  document, key-value, column, and graph NoSQL databases. For now, Eclipse JNoSQL supports about https://www.jnosql.org/docs/supported_dbs.html[30 NoSQL databases].
```

> For this challenge, let's develop the persistence layer to integrate with Document NoSQL databases type. Eclipse JNoSQL supports various Document NoSQL databases. You can find a list of supported databases, along with their configurations and dependencies, on the https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-databases[GitHub repository].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this challenge, let's develop the persistence layer to integrate with document NoSQL databases. Eclipse JNoSQL supports various document NoSQL databases. You can find a list of supported databases, along with their configurations and dependencies, on the https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-databases[GitHub repository].
```

> ==== Configuring Project Dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Configuring project dependencies
```

> Let's use MongoDB as Document NoSQL database default. Add the following Maven dependency into the `pom.xml` file of the project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's use MongoDB as the default document database. Add the following Maven dependency to the `pom.xml` file of the project:
```

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.eclipse.jnosql.databases</groupId>
  <artifactId>jnosql-mongodb</artifactId>
  <version>1.1.0</version>
</dependency>
----

> Once you have added the appropriate dependency, you need to configure the credentials for your Document NoSQL database. These credentials typically include details such as the database name, host, port, and any required authentication credentials. To configure MongoDB, you can find the supported credentials properties at the https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-databases#mongodb[Eclipse JNoSQL MongoDB Database API Configuration].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you add the appropriate dependency, you need to configure the credentials for your document database. These credentials typically include details such as the database name, host, port, and any required authentication credentials. To configure MongoDB, you can find the supported credentials properties at the https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-databases#mongodb[Eclipse JNoSQL MongoDB Database API Configuration].
```

> ==== Setting up Local NoSQL Databases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Setting up local NoSQL databases
```

> Install and manage databases locally requires additional efforts, and we will not cover it in this blog post. We chose to use Docker Compose as the tooling for managing containers locally. Take a look at https://docs.docker.com/compose/[Docker Compose Overview] to learn more about this tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Installing and managing databases locally requires additional efforts that we will not cover it in this blog post. We chose to use Docker Compose as the tooling for managing containers locally. Take a look at the https://docs.docker.com/compose/[Docker Compose overview] to learn more about this tool.
```

Let's create a `docker-compose.yml` file into the project root directory and add the following content:

[source, yaml]
----
services:

  mongo:
    image: mongo
    restart: always
    environment:
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME: root
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD: example
    ports:
      - 27017:27017

  mongo-express:
    image: mongo-express:1.0.0-alpha
    restart: always
    ports:
      - 8081:8081
    environment:
      ME_CONFIG_MONGODB_ADMINUSERNAME: root
      ME_CONFIG_MONGODB_ADMINPASSWORD: example
      ME_CONFIG_MONGODB_URL: mongodb://root:example@mongo:27017/
----

> For convenience, the content above added a mongo-express service that will allow us to navigate and manage MongoDB data by a friendly web interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For convenience, the previous example added a `mongo-express` service that allows us to navigate and manage MongoDB data through a friendly web interface.
```

> NOTE: Feel free to customize the declaration of the containers in the `docker-compose.yml` file. For example, the database data is saved inside the container image, which means that the data will be lost ever the containers are deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Feel free to customize the declaration of the containers in the `docker-compose.yml` file. For example, the database data is saved inside the container image, which means that the data will be lost if the containers are deleted.
```

> Now, to start up the databases we just need to perform the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, to start up the databases we just need to run the following command:
```

[source, bash]
----
docker-compose up -d
----

> After perform this command, you should be able to access the mongo-express at http://localhost:8081/ :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should now be able to access the mongo-express UI at http://localhost:8081/ :
```

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/mongo-express.png[Mongo Express, align="center" width=80%]

> ==== Defining Database Credentials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Defining database credentials
```

> After to define the MongoDB database instance that we'll use, we are able to setting up Eclipse JNoSQL framework correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we defined the MongoDB database instance, we can set up the Eclipse JNoSQL framework.
```

> Eclipse JNoSQL uses https://microprofile.io/specifications/microprofile-config/[Eclipse MicroProfile Config] to get the required configurations to establish the connection to the databases. We can define these properties on the `resources/META-INF/microprofile-config.properties` or via environment variables. To get more information about Eclipse MicroProfile Config, take a look at its https://microprofile.io/specifications/microprofile-config/[documentation].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eclipse JNoSQL uses link:https://microprofile.io/specifications/microprofile-config/[MicroProfile Config] to get the required configurations to establish the connection to the databases. We can define these properties in the `resources/META-INF/microprofile-config.properties` file or by using environment variables. For more information about  MicroProfile Config, take a look at its link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/external-configuration.html/[External configuration of microservices].
```

> According to the `docker-compose.yml` file that we have created previously, we can define the properties like below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
According to the `docker-compose.yml` file that we created previously, we can define the following properties:
```

[source, properties]
----
jnosql.mongodb.host=localhost:27017
jnosql.mongodb.user=root
jnosql.mongodb.password=example
jnosql.mongodb.authentication.source=admin
----

> ==== Modeling Data with Jakarta NoSQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Modeling data with Jakarta NoSQL
```

> Once we added the Eclipse JNoSQL dependencies, Jakarta NoSQL api comes together as a transient dependency to the project, allowing us to create the NoSQL entities we want.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we add the Eclipse JNoSQL dependencies, the Jakarta NoSQL api comes together as a transient dependency to the project, allowing us to create the NoSQL entities we want.
```

> Let's modeling the `GameMatch` entity. Such entity will represent each game match result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's model the `GameMatch` entity, which represents each game match result.
```

As we said before, Eclipse JNoSQL allows us to use Java Records as entities, so, let's use this feature:

[source, java]
----
package org.jakartaee.sample.model;

import jakarta.nosql.Column;
import jakarta.nosql.Entity;
import jakarta.nosql.Id;

@Entity
public record GameMatch (
        @Id
        String id,

        @Column
        PlayerInfo playerA,

        @Column
        PlayerInfo playerB,

        @Column
        PlayerInfo winner,

        @Column
        PlayerInfo loser,

        @Column
        Boolean tied
){
}
----

> To represent each player name and movement, lets modeling such data as `PlayerInfo` record class:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To represent each player name and movement, let's model such data as a `PlayerInfo` record class:
```

[source, java]
----
package org.jakartaee.sample.model;

import jakarta.nosql.Column;
import jakarta.nosql.Entity;

@Entity
public record PlayerInfo (

        @Column
        String name,

        @Column
        String movement
){
}

----

> ==== Data Storage and Retrieval with Jakarta Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Data storage and retrieval with Jakarta Data
```

> Now, in order to store and retrieve such entities from MongoDB database, it's required to create a component that will be responsible to do that. It's common to see developers using patterns like Data Access Object (DAO) to implement these components. That's not a problem at all, but we use to see them making the components closer to a specific vendor database semantics, raising a vendor lock-in situation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we'll create a component to store and retrieve such entities from the MongoDB database. It's common to see developers using patterns like data access object (DAO) to implement these components. That's not a problem at all, but we used to see them making the components closer to a specific vendor database semantics, raising a vendor lock-in situation.
```

> Nowadays, in the cloud era where we pay as we go, switching between NoSQL solutions could be interesting to save resources and costs. Vendor lock-in would compromise this action, probably. Also, other consideration comes to the table when there's a need to switch databases, like: time spent on the change, the learning curve of a new API to use with this database, the code that will be lost, the persistence layer that needs to be replaced, etc. This is where the flexibility of Jakarta NoSQL shines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nowadays, in the cloud era where we pay as we go, switching between NoSQL solutions can save resources and costs. But vendor lock-in would probably compromise this strategy. Also, other considerations come to the table when there's a need to switch databases, such as time spent on the change, the learning curve of a new database API, the code that will be lost, the persistence layer that needs to be replaced, etc. This is where the flexibility of Jakarta NoSQL shines.
```

> Another interesting point is that DAO components tend to be closer to the database semantics than the business domain model language, requiring from developers a high cognitive load to connects the dots and fill the gaps between the technical codes and business necessities, once the code is not expressive enough, and doesn't fit with the ubiquitous language of the business. In this point, Jakarta Data comes to play!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another interesting point is that DAO components tend to be closer to the database semantics than the business domain model language, requiring a high cognitive load for developers to connect the dots and fill the gaps between the technical codes and business necessities, once the code is not expressive enough, and doesn't fit with the ubiquitous language of the business. At this point, Jakarta Data comes into play!
```

Coming back to our challenge, let's create a repository component that will represents the play-offs:

[source, java]
----
package org.jakartaee.sample.model;

import jakarta.data.repository.DataRepository;
import jakarta.data.repository.Query;
import jakarta.data.repository.Repository;
import jakarta.data.repository.Save;

@Repository
public interface Playoffs extends DataRepository<GameMatch,String> {

    @Save
    GameMatch add(GameMatch gameMatch);

}
----

> ==== Capturing and Persisting Game Matches

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Capturing and persisting game matches
```

> With the entity and repository already created, it's needed to capture and persist the results of each game match. The next obvious question is: how could we capture the required game events?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the entity and repository already created, we need to capture and persist the results of each game match. The next obvious question is: how could we capture the required game events?
```

It's a really good question! The answer is: https://jakarta.ee/specifications/cdi/4.0/jakarta-cdi-spec-4.0#events[the Events API provided by the Jakarta Context and Dependency Injection (CDI) specification]!

> *JNopo* game is using https://jakarta.ee/specifications/cdi/4.0/jakarta-cdi-spec-4.0#events[CDI Events] to promote extension points, based on event publishing, to be used as needed. With that, we can implement an `@Observable` methods on any CDI bean to handle event objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JNopo game uses https://jakarta.ee/specifications/cdi/4.0/jakarta-cdi-spec-4.0#events[CDI Events] to promote extension points, based on event publishing, to be used as needed. With that, we can implement an `@Observable` methods on any CDI bean to handle event objects.
```

> See below the `GameState` interface. Objects that implements this interface will act as event objects:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the following `GameState` interface. Objects that implement this interface will act as event objects:
```

[source, java]
----
package org.jakartaee.sample.game;

public sealed interface GameState permits
        WaitingPlayers,
        GameInvalid,
        GameAbandoned,
        GameReady,
        GameRunning,
        GameOver {
    String gameId();
}
----

> The `GameState` interface is a sealed interface that defines all the supported game state. According to the sealed implementation, the event that we're interested is the `GameOver` state. Such class is a record class but, it's not just a simple record class that acts like a data transfer object (DTO), it has useful methods that returns important info like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `GameState` interface is a sealed interface that defines all the supported game states. According to the sealed implementation, the event that we're interested is the `GameOver` state. Such class is a record class. But it's not just a simple record class that acts like a data transfer object (DTO), it has useful methods that return important info like:
```

> * The game identification;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The game identification
```

> * A tied attribute, to know if the game has ended as a tied one;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A tied attribute, to know whether the game ended as a tie
```

> * The player A and its movement;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Player A and its moves
```

> * The player B and its movement;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Player B and its moves
```

> * The winner player and its movement, if the game has ended as a non-tied one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The winning player and its moves, if the game ended without a tie.
```

> * The loser player and its movement, if the game has ended as a non-tied one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The losing player and its moves, if the game ended without a tie.
```

> Next step: let`s create the `GameMatchCapturer` bean that will be responsible to capture the emitted `GameOver` state and then store the game match results into the database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let`s create the `GameMatchCapturer` bean that captures the emitted `GameOver` state and stores the game match results in the database:
```

[source, java]
----
package org.jakartaee.sample.model;

import jakarta.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;
import jakarta.enterprise.event.Observes;
import jakarta.inject.Inject;
import org.jakartaee.sample.game.GameOver;

@ApplicationScoped
public class GameMatchCapturer {

    public void captureAndPersist(@Observes GameOver gameOver){
        // put the persistence logic here...
    }

}

----

At this point, let's instantiate a new `GameMatch` entity instance, populate it from `GameOver` data and then store it into the database by using the `Playoffs` component.

> The required `Playoff` component, which is a repository implementation offered by Jakarta Data specification implementation, Eclipse JNoSQL, will be injected by CDI using the `@Inject` and `@Database(DOCUMENT)` annotations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The required `Playoff` component, which is a repository implementation provided by Eclipse JNoSQL, will be injected by CDI using the `@Inject` and `@Database(DOCUMENT)` annotations:
```

[source, java]
----
package org.jakartaee.sample.model;

import jakarta.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;
import jakarta.enterprise.event.Observes;
import jakarta.inject.Inject;
import org.eclipse.jnosql.mapping.Database;
import org.eclipse.jnosql.mapping.DatabaseType;
import org.jakartaee.sample.game.GameOver;

@ApplicationScoped
public class GameMatchCapturer {

    @Inject
    @Database(DatabaseType.DOCUMENT)
    Playoffs playoffs;

    public void captureAndPersist(@Observes GameOver gameOver){

            var gameMatch  = new GameMatch(
                    gameOver.gameId(),
                    PlayerInfo.of(gameOver.playerAInfo()),
                    PlayerInfo.of(gameOver.playerBInfo()),
                    gameOver.winnerInfo().map(PlayerInfo::of).orElse(PlayerInfo.NOBODY),
                    gameOver.winnerInfo().map(PlayerInfo::of).orElse(PlayerInfo.NOBODY),
                    gameOver.isTied()
            );

            playoffs.add(gameMatch);
    }

}
----

> Now, let's get started the  https://openliberty.io/[Open Liberty] runtime to figure out if the game match results are being stored on the MongoDB:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, let's start the Open Liberty runtime to figure out if the game match results are being stored on the MongoDB.
```

> * On Linux/Mac machines, perform the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* On Linux/Mac machines, run the following command:
```

+
[source, bash]
----
./mvnw liberty:dev
----

> * On Windows machines, perform the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* On Windows machines, run the following command:
```

+
[source, powershell]
----
mvnw.cmd liberty:dev
----

After some game matches, we can confirm the persistence of the game matches into the database by looking at Mongo Express running on http://localhost:8081 :

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/mongo-express-01.png[Mongo Express 01, align="center" width=80%]

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/mongo-express-02.png[Mongo Express 02, align="center" width=80%]

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/mongo-express-03.png[Mongo Express 03, align="center" width=80%]

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/mongo-express-04.png[Mongo Express 04, align="center" width=80%]

Or, if you're a command-line practitioner, you can check the data by using the `mongosh` cli:

[source, bash]
----
docker exec -it finish-mongo-1 mongosh -u root -p example --authenticationDatabase admin jnopo
----

> Once connected, feel free to perform mongo commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once connected, you can run `mongo` commands:
```

* Getting the number of stored documents:
+
[source, bash]
----
jnopo> db.GameMatch.countDocuments()
3
----

* Getting the stored documents list:
+
[source, bash]
----
jnopo> db.GameMatch.find()
[
  {
    _id: '2f42cf9e-f99c-44e5-bda8-7707da2579a3',
    tied: true,
    winner: { name: '', movement: '' },
    playerA: { name: 'Max', movement: 'ROCK' },
    playerB: { name: 'Ghost', movement: 'ROCK' },
    loser: { name: '', movement: '' }
  },
  {
    _id: 'c425815c-2aaf-4caa-a975-8e8089f0a0ce',
    tied: false,
    winner: { name: 'Max', movement: 'PAPER' },
    playerA: { name: 'Ghost', movement: 'ROCK' },
    playerB: { name: 'Max', movement: 'PAPER' },
    loser: { name: 'Max', movement: 'PAPER' }
  },
  {
    _id: 'bb7e7cd5-f8fe-4db1-9e90-44ecd433b4de',
    tied: false,
    winner: { name: 'Ghost', movement: 'ROCK' },
    playerA: { name: 'Ghost', movement: 'ROCK' },
    playerB: { name: 'Max', movement: 'SCISSORS' },
    loser: { name: 'Ghost', movement: 'ROCK' }
  }
]
----

> Great! *JNopo* is storing the game match results as expected! It's time to create the winner ranking and then expose it though a restful endpoint http://localhost:9080/jakarta-nosql-game/api/playoffs/ranking .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Great! JNopo is storing the game match results as expected! It's time to create the winner ranking and then expose it though a restful endpoint:
http://localhost:9080/jakarta-nosql-game/api/playoffs/ranking .
```

> ==== Exposing the Winner Ranking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Exposing the winner ranking
```

> Collecting and storing the game matches results is a great step to make us able to implement the winner ranking feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Collecting and storing the game matches enables us to implement the winner ranking feature.
```

> Let's implement the `Ranking` class to represent any ranking on the *JNopo* application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's implement the `Ranking` class to represent any ranking on the JNopo application.
```

The `Ranking` creation requires the data from the `Playoffs` component. In order to avoid to create a new layer to keep the logic of the ranking creation, I decided to use a simple approach: a simple static factory method on the `Ranking` class itself.

Firstly, `Playoffs` needs to provide a method to retrieve the non-tied game results:

[source, java]
----
package org.jakartaee.sample.model;

import jakarta.data.repository.DataRepository;
import jakarta.data.repository.Query;
import jakarta.data.repository.Repository;
import jakarta.data.repository.Save;

import java.util.stream.Stream;

@Repository
public interface Playoffs extends DataRepository<GameMatch,String> {

    @Save
    GameMatch add(GameMatch gameMatch);

    @Query("select * from GameMatch where tied=false")
    Stream<GameMatch> nonTiedGameMatches();

}
----

> NOTE: *JNoSQL* offers a simple query language pretty similar to SQL but be sure that it's not a complete SQL implementation, which means, some aggregation and functions will be not available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: JNoSQL offers a simple query language that is pretty similar to SQL. However, it's not a complete SQL implementation and some aggregation and functions are not available.
```

> Regarding the aggregation process that evolves the ranking logic creation, we use to see developers delegating this aggregation logic to the DBMS and, depending on the persistence mechanism, it should be the best approach. By now, the grouping projection functions like we have with Jakarta Persistence is not available on the Jakarta NoSQL for now, but, in the future, such capability could be available as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regarding the aggregation process that evolves the ranking logic creation, we used to see developers delegating this aggregation logic to the DBMS and, depending on the persistence mechanism, it should be the best approach. For now, the grouping projection functions like we have with Jakarta Persistence are not available on the Jakarta NoSQL. However, in the future, such capabilities might be available.
```

import java.util.Collection;
import java.util.Comparator;
import java.util.LinkedHashMap;
import java.util.Map;
import java.util.stream.Collectors;

public record Ranking(Map<String, Integer> data) {
    public static Ranking winnerRanking(Playoffs playoffs) {

        var data =
                // getting the game matches that are not tied
                playoffs.nonTiedGameMatches()
                // grouping by winner's name and summarize by game match
                .collect(Collectors.groupingBy(
                        g -> g.winner().name(),
                        Collectors.collectingAndThen(Collectors.toList(), Collection::size)))
                .entrySet()
                .stream()
                // sorting the results by number of game match in descending order
                .sorted(Map.Entry.comparingByValue(Comparator.reverseOrder()))
                // collecting as a LinkedHashMap to keep the sorted items
                .collect(Collectors.toMap(
                        Map.Entry::getKey,
                        Map.Entry::getValue,
                        (e1, e2) -> e1, LinkedHashMap::new));

        return new Ranking(data);
    }
}
----

> Now, let make this ranking be accessible by our model. As the ranking needs the data from `Playoffs` component, why not to put this ranking creation on the `Playoffs` interface? That's we're going to do! It is possible since the Java 8:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let make this ranking be accessible by our model. As the ranking needs the data from `Playoffs` component, why not to put this ranking creation on the `Playoffs` interface? That's we're going to do! It is possible since the Java 8:
```
```suggestion
Now, let make this ranking accessible to our model. As the ranking needs the data from the `Playoffs` component, why not to put the ranking creation on the `Playoffs` interface? That's we're going to do! It is possible since Java 8:
```

[source, java]
----
package org.jakartaee.sample.model;

import jakarta.data.repository.DataRepository;
import jakarta.data.repository.Query;
import jakarta.data.repository.Repository;
import jakarta.data.repository.Save;

import java.util.stream.Stream;

@Repository
public interface Playoffs extends DataRepository<GameMatch,String> {

    @Save
    GameMatch add(GameMatch gameMatch);

    @Query("select * from GameMatch where tied=false")
    Stream<GameMatch> nonTiedGameMatches();

    default Ranking winnerRanking(){
       return Ranking.winnerRanking(this);
    }
}
----

It looks like we're getting closer to our goal!

Following the challenge requirements, let's create the resource component that will expose the winner ranking.

> Firstly, let's create the `RestApplication` class to define the url dedicated to restful endpoints:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firstly, let's create the `RestApplication` class to define the URL dedicated to restful endpoints:
```

[source, java]
----
package org.jakartaee.sample.resources;

import jakarta.ws.rs.ApplicationPath;
import jakarta.ws.rs.core.Application;

@ApplicationPath("/api")
public class RestApplication extends Application {

}
----

> Now, any url under `/api` will be handled by the Jakarta Restful Webservices implementation available in our runtime environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, any URL under `/api` will be handled by the Jakarta Restful Web Services implementation available in our runtime environment.
```

> Next step: let's implement the `PlayoffsResource` resource. This component will expose an HTTP GET endpoint for the `/api/playoffs/ranking` url:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next step: let's implement the `PlayoffsResource` resource. This component will expose an HTTP GET endpoint for the `/api/playoffs/ranking` URL:
```

[source, java]
----
package org.jakartaee.sample.resources;

import jakarta.inject.Inject;
import jakarta.ws.rs.Consumes;
import jakarta.ws.rs.GET;
import jakarta.ws.rs.Path;
import jakarta.ws.rs.Produces;
import jakarta.ws.rs.core.MediaType;
import org.eclipse.jnosql.mapping.Database;
import org.eclipse.jnosql.mapping.DatabaseType;
import org.jakartaee.sample.model.Playoffs;
import org.jakartaee.sample.model.Ranking;

@Path("/playoffs")
@Consumes({MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON})
@Produces({MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON})
public class PlayoffsResource {

    @Inject
    @Database(DatabaseType.DOCUMENT)
    Playoffs playoffs;

    @GET
    @Path("/ranking")
    public Ranking getRanking() {
        return playoffs.winnerRanking();
    }
}
----

> It's time to test everything! Let's restart the https://openliberty.io/[Open Liberty] runtime:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's time to test everything! Let's restart the Open Liberty runtime:
```

> * On Linux/Mac machines, perform the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* On Linux/Mac machines, run the following command:
```

+
[source, bash]
----
./mvnw liberty:dev
----

> * On Windows machines, perform the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* On Windows machines, run the following command:
```

+
[source, powershell]
----
mvnw.cmd liberty:dev
----

> https://openliberty.io/[Open Liberty]  provides us an amazing tooling to help during the development of Jakarta EE / MicroProfile applications. When the dev mode is running, we can use some HTTP addresses to test and explore the capabilities offered by this amazing Jakarta EE/MicroProfile runtime:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open Liberty provides amazing tooling to help during develop Jakarta EE / MicroProfile applications. When link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/development-mode.html[dev mode] is running, we can use some HTTP addresses to test and explore the capabilities offered by this amazing Jakarta EE/MicroProfile runtime:
```

[source, console]
----
[INFO] [AUDIT   ] CWWKT0016I: Web application available (default_host): http://localhost:9080/openapi/
[INFO] [AUDIT   ] CWWKT0016I: Web application available (default_host): http://localhost:9080/health/
[INFO] [AUDIT   ] CWWKT0016I: Web application available (default_host): http://localhost:9080/jwt/
[INFO] [AUDIT   ] CWWKT0016I: Web application available (default_host): http://localhost:9080/metrics/
[INFO] [AUDIT   ] CWWKT0016I: Web application available (default_host): http://localhost:9080/openapi/ui/
[INFO] [AUDIT   ] CWWKT0016I: Web application available (default_host): http://localhost:9080/ibm/api/
[INFO] [AUDIT   ] CWWKT0016I: Web application available (default_host): http://localhost:9080/jakarta-nosql-game/
----

> In this blog post, let's focus on two of these url:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's focus on two of these URLs:
```

> * http://localhost:9080/jakarta-nosql-game/ : it's the url of the application that we can use locally;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* http://localhost:9080/jakarta-nosql-game/  is the URL of the application that we can use locally.
```

> * http://localhost:9080/openapi/ui/ : it's the Swagger UI interface that  https://openliberty.io/[Open Liberty]  offers out-of-the-box, facilitating the rest endpoint testing via browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* http://localhost:9080/openapi/ui/  is the Swagger UI interface that  Open Liberty  offers out-of-the-box, facilitating the rest endpoint testing via browser.
```

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/swagger-ui-01.png[Swagger UI 01, align="center" width=80%]

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/swagger-ui-02.png[Swagger UI 02, align="center" width=80%]

If you're a command-line practitioner, you can check the data by using the `curl` command:

[source, bash]
----
curl -X 'GET' \
  'http://localhost:9080/jakarta-nosql-game/api/playoffs/ranking' \
  -H 'accept: application/json' | jq
----

[source, json]
----
{
  "data": {
    "Max": 3,
    "Ghost": 1
  }
}
----

Congratulations if you made it this far!

Now, *JNopo* is providing a winner ranking!

If you're interesting to take a look on the finished project code version developed during this challenge, clone this https://github.com/OpenLiberty/sample-jakartaNoSQL-game[Git repository] and then navigate to the `winner-ranking-challenge` directory.

[source, bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/OpenLiberty/sample-jakartaNoSQL-game.git
cd sample-jakartaNoSQL-game
cd winner-ranking-challenge
----

> == Key Takeaways

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Key takeaways
```

> This challenge was an amazing opportunity to learn not just about Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data to simplify the NoSQL integration with Java applications but be exploring new development approaches using interesting Java features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This challenge was an amazing opportunity to learn not just about Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data to simplify the NoSQL integration with Java applications but also to explore new development approaches using interesting Java features.
```

What we got by doing these challenges:

* A practical example that uses:
** Sealed classes (final feature since Java 17)
** Pattern Matching for Instanceof (final feature since Java 16)

> ** Pattern Matching for Switch (final feature since Java 21);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Pattern Matching for Switch (final feature since Java 21)
```

What we learned from them:

* How to configure Eclipse JNoSQL to allow us to work with Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data in a Jakarta EE / MicroProfile project
* How to work with Jakarta NoSQL to create entities pretty similar to Jakarta Persistence approach
* How to create repositories with Jakarta Data, the newest Jakarta EE Specification that will be available in the Jakarta EE 11

> == Next Steps: Continuing the Journey

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Next steps: continuing the journey
```

Congratulations on getting this far!

In the next blog post, a new challenge is introduced: *Switching NoSQL Databases with Ease*! Stay tuned!

This blog post is the 2nd blog in a 3-part blog series. You can check out the other blogs in this series through the links below:

> * link:../../../2024/04/29/simplifying-nosql-database-integration-with-jakarta-nosql.html[Simplifying NoSQL Database Integration with Jakarta NoSQL, window="_blank"];

Reviewer: will have to manage these links to reflect new filenamaes and also not expose link to final post before it's published

Author: Okay! I'll keep it as is by now. Let's fix it before publishing it.

// * link:../../../2024/04/20/jakarta-nosql-challenge-switching-nosql-easily.html[Jakarta NoSQL in Action: Switching NoSQL Databases with Ease, window="_blank"];

To see more sample projects, take a look at the official Eclipse JNoSQL samples repositories:

- https://github.com/jnosql/demos-se
- https://github.com/JNOSQL/demos-ee

To learn more about Eclipse JNoSQL, take a look at these official repositories:

- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql
- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-databases
- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-extensions

> if you're an expert on some NoSQL database that Eclipse JNoSQL doesn't support, feel free to open an issue or a PR on the project repositories mentioned above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if you're an expert on some NoSQL database that Eclipse JNoSQL doesn't support, feel free to open an issue or a PR on these project repositories.
```

> Except for the NoSQL solutions mentioned like MongoDB and Couchbase, all the technology used in this blog post are open-source, so, what do you think about contributing to these projects? If you don't know how to get started to contribute, take a look at this https://www.youtube.com/live/7qhHOOoZEBU?feature=share[Coffee.withJava("Contribute to JNoSQL") Youtube Series], or if you prefer, feel free to contact me Contributing to these projects is not just with codes, you could help a lot by promoting and speaking about them wherever you go! Contributing to open-source is a great way to boost your career, and improve your skills to become an effective developer and relevant in the market! Think about that!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Except for the NoSQL solutions like MongoDB and Couchbase, all the technology used in this blog post is open-source, so, what do you think about contributing to these projects? If you don't know how to get started to contribute, take a look at this https://www.youtube.com/live/7qhHOOoZEBU?feature=share[Coffee.withJava("Contribute to JNoSQL") Youtube Series], or if you prefer, feel free to contact me. Contributing to these projects is not just code, you could help a lot by promoting and speaking about them wherever you go! Contributing to open-source is a great way to boost your career and improve your skills to become an effective developer and relevant in the market! Think about that!
```
